[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> New studies show that
repeating sacred sounds can
have a powerful effect on
your health and well-being.
Mantra, new science on
an ancient practice.
>> Many traditions and religions
of all over the world have
understood the power of uttering
sacred sound to make better
contact with divinity and
fostering our spiritual health.
>> This is Gaia News.
The practice of mantra, or the
repetition of sacred sounds,
has been an integral part
of many spiritual traditions
throughout the ages.
Today, exciting new
research is scientifically
validating the profound
psychological and physiological
benefits of this
ancient practice.
Dr. Shamini Jain is a
leader in the emerging
field of biofield science and
author of "Healing Ourselves."
She knows mantra
repetition to be
a highly effective tool
for consciousness expansion
and healing.
>> Sometimes we get so bogged
down in the conditioned mind,
that we find it harder
to reach our spirit.
So mantra is a tool for
us to reach our spirit,
whether we call that god, deep
consciousness, higher self.
There are many names for it,
but it's really a technique
for transcending the minds.
And it can be something that's
spoken out loud, literally
like repeating a word out loud.
It can also be something
that we repeat silently.
It can also be sung.
And many traditions, almost
all global traditions,
really have some
sort of practice
where they utter sacred sound.
>> In ancient traditions, the
primary function of mantra was
to connect with the divine.
>> In these traditions,
there was a deep relationship
of sound with consciousness.
By working with mantra in
these ancient traditions,
it was leading you to
expand your consciousness,
so that you can be in better
contact with divinity.
>> With the growing interest in
studying these ancient systems,
scientific research is now
starting to explore the ways
in which mantra may
affect the body and mind.
One recent focus
of the study has
been on the effect of mantra
on psychological conditions.
>> There is a body of literature
that has been published
for example by Dr. Jill Bormann
at University of California,
San Diego.
And she examined what they
called, "mantram" repetition,
which was essentially the
uttering of a sacred sound.
They've done studies for
example with veterans with PTSD,
or post-traumatic
stress disorder,
showing reductions
in PTSD symptoms
for those who repeated a
sacred word or phrase, compared
to just repeating something
that had no spiritual meaning.
>> Other recent studies are
showing the effect of mantra
on physiological
markers of health.
>> Some of the strongest
data that we see with mantra
practice is the
effect on the heart.
And so we actually see that
practicing different forms
of mantra, whether
it's Buddhist,
or Hindu, or other
traditions has
an effect on reducing
blood pressure
and improving
cardiovascular health.
There are some
studies also looking
at this in terms of heart rate
variability, which is really
the dynamic dance of your
autonomic nervous system.
Anyway you look at
it, the data are
pretty clear that
mantra meditation
has a profound effect
on heart health.
>> Yet another groundbreaking
study has shown that mantra
repetition in the
form of kirtan,
or call and response singing,
has an effect on cell aging.
>> They found not only
reductions in mental
and emotional suffering, such
as stress and other factors.
They found increases in
markers of cell aging.
Specifically they saw shifts
in an enzyme called telomerase,
which helps to protect
ourselves against aging.
>> While the healing effects
of mantra practice are clear,
scientists are working on
understanding the mechanism
behind which this works.
One fascinating recent
study looked closely
at brain function.
>> In terms of the brain, a
really interesting study that
was published in a top tier
journal, "Nature Report,"
looked at the effects
of Buddhist meditation
and chanting, particularly
compared to just chanting
regular words.
And interestingly
what they found
was, first of all, the
chanting of the Buddhist words
by these people who were just
being trained in how to do it,
resulted in increased
delta waves.
Enhanced delta wave
activity has been found
in many forms of meditation.
Those increased delta
waves in the brain
seem to be connected to
the meditator, in this case
the chanters, experience of
an expanded sense of self
that was beyond conditioning.
>> As there are many ways
to practice mantra, Dr.
Jain recommends finding a
tradition that you resonate
with and an experienced
teacher to guide your practice.
Dr. Jain has high hopes that
scientific interest in mantra
continues and deepens.
>> There needs to be more
research in mantra meditation,
specifically integrating
some of the perspectives from
the spiritual practitioners
as well as things like brain
changes.
A lot of these practices
were really meant for us
to have whole person
well-being, which
means spiritual, physical,
emotional, social, relational.
And so that's the
type of research
that we want to see
with mantra meditation.
Where we're not just
looking at one brain factor,
but we're really looking
at the whole person.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.